Okay, welcome back. Uh, this is lecture
five of the A section, the beginner
section. Uh, I'm planning 10 lectures,
so this means we're halfway through.
Does that feel good? Yay. Yeah. Okay.
Jazz hands. Yes. Um,
uh, I think we're where I want to be.
Uh,
which is just not a particular point,
but that you all seem to be keeping up.
Yeah. Does that feel that way or am I am
I deliluding myself? Yeah, that's the
idea. It's just the pace. The goal is
the pace and not the destination, right?
Is that what's that cliche saying? It's
the journey, not the destination.
Something like that. So that that's true
here. Um there's another section where I
where I hurt people, right? That's the
Friday section. Some No, I joke, but
some of you are also in there. The
Friday section is harder. Um, and it's
also a journey. But, uh, uh, here I want
to take it slow and really focus on
conceptual things. Uh, so what we're
going to do today is pick up where we
left off last time. Um, and I'll remind
you where that was when we get going.
But I have a little bit of uh, since
we're at the halfway point, a little bit
of uh, let's say programmatic um,
reminder too about what this is all
about because it's easy to get lost in
all the detail. Uh the goal here that is
the statistical the rethinking part of
statistical rethinking is not about bays
but it's about having some kind of
transparent and logical plan for
connecting scientific hypotheses and
models to data analysis. And so that's
where we're going. And this can be quite
slow but that's really the goal is to
emphasize that. And I'm going to I'm
trying to unfold methods for doing
exactly that gradually uh using a series
of examples. Um so there I'm not kind of
doing the typical thing that I
experienced in my stats education which
was you get the full formal framework on
day one with a bunch of definitions uh
and then you have to try to practice it.
I'm trying to do something which I hope
works better where I am using the
examples first and just using bits of
the formal framework in each one and
eventually it it assembles itself I
think. Uh at least that's the that's the
goal and I'm I'm figuring out some of
this as I go. Uh I apologize but I am
working very hard on this. Okay. Um so
here's here's some of the distinctions
that we're practicing and the goal is to
teach you methods justifiable methods
for uh moving between these different
stages and the first stage is to have
some estim goal of what you want. Uh and
you might say to yourself well yeah of
course we have that and I would say have
you read a journal lately?
um lots of papers it is unclear that
there is any est demand at all. Right?
There's a data set and there's some set
of software tools that have allowed them
to explore it but it's not clear that
there's any formal scientific question
at all. Uh or maybe there wasn't even
when they started. Uh so we want to be
very clear about what the estimate is.
Um and then it'd be nice if there was
some way to figure out how to construct
it. Ideally that's the estimator
uh in in the basian framework. Um uh
easy way to do this is to construct a
generative model uh and then combine
that with the est demand using methods I
am gradually unveiling to you um to
construct a basian model. But there are
other ways to do it which are also
justifiable. Uh so in this this metaphor
on the slide the est demand is this um I
think this is supposed to be a hedgehog
or a porcupine one of the two. It's
really not clear, but it's a cake. It's
supposed to be edible. And there's a
recipe to construct it that involves
mostly butter and chocolate and then a
few other things. Yeah. Um I assume some
of you cook and you know that this proc
understand this process. It's not clear
to me anymore than anybody cooks
actually. Yeah.
But if you do cook, congratulations. You
understand my metaphor. And then of
course what you get is not what you
wanted. And then you have to make
assessments about that about how it
deviates from the goal. Uh what
modifications you may need to make to
the recipe or uh maybe you conclude that
it is just not possible to construct uh
in a reasonable amount of time or with
the ingredients at hand that is the data
uh uh the um target cake or estim. Uh
but this is a bit cartoonish. I
apologize for the cartoonishness, but
I'm trying to give your your memory a
thing to anchor on so that you can think
about the workflow in terms of something
familiar. So, if you do a lot of cooking
like I do, uh this is a very familiar
thing. Uh cooking is like programming. I
think it's like computer programming.
You have to prepare, right? You have to
have the steps in sequence. It's very
much like programming, right? Um
uh so that's why I like the metaphor.
Okay, back to where we were before. Um
uh when we stopped last time we were
talking about how to engineer categories
in linear models using index variables
and we're going to get right back into
that. Um but where we were in the
conceptual workflow that is the
estimator estimate workflow is we had
declared these two estims
and we were working on the first still
on the left that is the total causal
effect of sex on weight. Yeah we have
these um generative models. Uh these
DAGs are not fully generative just to
remind you but they represent the
structural connections in the generative
model. Uh and what we need to do to
estimate the total causal effect of sex
on weight is to stratify our estimates
of average weight by sex which sounds
simple and yet I'm going to take an hour
and a half to in total to have done it
seems. Um I hope you like that. All
right. So here's the workflow diagram
just to remind you where we're going.
This is the plan. And I hope at this
point you you've seen these things
enough that this doesn't look that
complicated. You've got some structural
chunking you can do with it. I still
think this is just about the minimal
realistic scientific workflow. Uh when
people do analyses, it's often more
complicated than this. So for your own
past analyses, go back and think about
all the little side branches that you
went down and little diagnostics you
did. There's a lot going on there. Uh so
from left to right we've got our
generative model. We've declared two S
demands. The distribution of weight when
you intervene on sex that's estimate
when you intervene on sex holding height
constant.
Yeah. Which is impossible. Remember,
right? So this is uh the first one you
also can't do experimentally. But there
are things you there are experiments you
could imagine where you could intervene
on some variable and measure these
things. These these uh de causal
decompositions like estimate two where
we're trying to estimate one of the
causal paths that something acts
through. Often there's no experiment
possible but nevertheless you can
statistically estimate it and that's
what we're going to be talking about
today. I hope to get through both of
these estimates today. At least I have
slides to get through both of them
today. And that's where I'd like to end
up. Um we're going to do some synthetic
data testing. You've seen me do this
before. I think this is a really nice
routine habit to get into. Uh it'll
clarify your understanding of the
generative model and it'll give you
confidence that your software works.
Yeah. Um again, I assure you I've been
doing this for a long time, decades,
and I still make mistakes and so I my
workflow involves these synthetic data
testing things so I can catch those
mistakes. Um uh we're going to then
construct some estimates and what we
those estimates are posterior
distributions and since they are in and
of themselves not what we want. Yeah. Uh
what we want are things are functions of
the posterior distribution. And in this
case we will have posterior predictions
and we'll have the causal effects of
interest. And I I'll define those as we
go. This seems like a lot, but we're
going to go step by step. And the goal
is for you to understand why each step
is necessary. Okay, remember the
categorical owls. So, we constructed
this vector of alphas now for the
different colors of owls. And in the
additive model, all this means is that
we subset alpha by a variable in the
data table, which is this index variable
1 2 3 4, which corresponds to the
different colors. We're not actually
going to build a regression of owls and
their colors. Instead, remember we're uh
we're going to regress on sex in the how
uh data set. So, we have our linear
regression. Weight is the outcome
variable. It's modeled as a normally
distributed variable with some mean
which is conditional on the individual
as features of the individual. That's
what that little subi means. um with
some standard deviation sigma which is
constant across individuals. That
doesn't have to be true, but I'm trying
not to do everything at once here. Yeah,
you could also put a little sub eye on S
and make it a model of any data you want
as well. If you want to do that
sometime, ask me. I'm happy to show you,
but that's not what we're going to do
right now. Um, and then we're going to
have a mean uh just like we have
previously alpha
for for individual I and we've been
calling this alpha and intercept. We
want this intercept to be conditional on
the person's category on the person's
sex in this case. Uh so we subset it
with the variable capital S which is the
sex column in the how data set um
subseted by I. My convention uh in this
course what I've what I've settled on is
not to make a second subscript but to
use the brackets when I'm in subscripts
because otherwise the little i gets
tiny.
So this is that's all the brackets mean.
It's the same as subscripting. So w subi
is the i weight the weight on the i row
right because the the rows are people.
Um s bracket i here is the sex on the i
row. It's it's not S subi because the I
would be tiny because it's a second sub
a second subscript. Does that make
sense? But it doesn't mean anything
different. I apologize. It there's no
notation convention here which is
perfect. Here there's confusion because
it looks different but it means the same
thing. And if I if I notated them the
same way, you'd have this little like
speck on the slide which is the second
eye. So sorry, but that's just how how
the world is. Um the universe is hostile
to notation. Okay. Uh, and I've set it
up so that the first sex is female and
the second sex is male. That that is
autotogenetically correct, right? For
vertebrates at least. Um, males are the
derived sex developmentally. And uh then
we have a vector alpha of length two
where alpha sub one is the mean for
females in the sample and uh alpha sub 2
for males. Is this okay? Yeah. Um and
I've just showed you on the left of this
slide the first 12 rows. So you can see
the variables um a little bit draw this
out a little bit more. Right? So if we
set uh we look at the first row the
value of s is two. So what ends up
happening is the code pulls out alpha 2
right because s two is two. Yeah. And
that's all that's going on in the code
when you write the code. And then the
second row, um, now I equals 2 and it
pulls out one and so on. Uh, we need
priors. Um, one of the things I like
about the index variable approach,
someone asked this question last time. I
thought it was a really good question.
Can't you just use indicator or dummy
variables? Yes, you can. And that's
fine. I'm not against it. But one of the
problems in that case is that one of
your categories becomes the reference
case and all the others are offsets from
it. when in the index variables you can
assign the same prior to every category
which I find more comfortable in most
cases. So here the priors for males and
females are identical and that's easy to
do. This is not possible with dummy
variables.
Yeah, because the parameters mean
different things and you need a prior
for both of them. But it's not a big
deal. There's lots of data here. But in
low data cases that this is a much more
relaxing state to be in. So I've chosen
a prior normal distribution with a mean
of 60 and a standard deviation of 10.
Why 60? Because I know these are human
beings and 60 kilos is like the global
average adult weight and there's a huge
variance around that. A standard
deviation of 10 is a variance of 100. So
that is superhuman variance. This is a
very flat prior. Yeah, I would encourage
you. I'm not going to do the prior
predictive simulation in this lecture.
Uh I think I do it in the book. Uh but I
encourage you to do it as an exercise
because you need to get used to doing
prior predictive simulations. This is a
really wide prior. Really absurdly wide
prior. Yes. Question
>> depending on the sex.
>> Sorry.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I haven't understood the
question. Yeah. So, we're modeling
weight conditional on sex.
>> Just on sex. Yes.
>> Why would we?
>> Because uh because that would give us
the wrong answer. That's that's a great
question. So the question was why isn't
height in this model? And the answer is
because then we would not estimate the
causal effect of sex on weight.
Uh that would actually block us from
estimating the causal effect of sex on
weight. Uh and I will unfold that
argument as we go. So this is but this
gets straight to the heart of what the
idea here is with workflow is when you
choose a particular estim um that
doesn't mean you need all the variables
in the model. uh there will be
information that is ignorable
conditional on the estimate you've
chosen and in this case including height
is irrelevant. So the the effect of sex
works partly through height and we're
going to compute how much of it does
later at the end of this lecture. But in
this case that's not the question. The
question is what's the effect of sex on
height and height is ignorable. It's
just one of the pathways but we're not
decomposing the pathways. Does that make
sense? Um, in a future lecture,
hopefully next week, I'm going to uh
present the more formal framework that
lets us make those decisions about which
variables are ignorable. But for now,
I'm just kind of going to wave my hands
and assert it and hope that intuition
brings it through you through the
graphics. But that's a perfect question.
Yeah. Okay. Does the pri is the prior
not too offensive for you? Is that good?
I I choose these priors to make you
think a bit. Most of them are wider than
I would use. Um uh but this is this is
the idea is to think about it uh
scientifically.
Use information that's not in the
sample, right? That you know already.
Humans global average weight is 60. Put
a big variance on it. Um you're in good
shape. Okay. Uh here's the testing.
We're going to make a really simple
generative model of weight dependent
upon sex. So all this code is doing, we
already have this um uh function that we
wrote last time. So I just get to use
it. And uh we're just making it so that
the um uh sexes differ a little bit uh
on average. So in this simulation, the
average difference is about 20 21.
That's what you see at the bottom. So
I've generated first a female sample 100
females simulated females
um with some
average relationship and uh then some
males and then I take the difference and
it's about 20 in this simulated example.
The exact difference doesn't matter.
This is about testing, right? So you'd
actually want to vary it, right? Do a
simulation where they're just the same.
Make sure your code shows that. do a
simulation where they're different. Uh
make sure your code can recover that.
Does this make sense? Um now
uh yeah, so then we can we can put the
synthetic data into the statistical
model
and show that it recovers what's going
on. So if you look down at the bottom of
this slide at the precy output, the
alpha 1, which remember is the average
adult weight for the synthetic females
is about 75 and alpha 2, which is the
average adult weight for the synthetic
males, is about 97. If you take the
difference, it's about 22. So, yay,
we're doing okay. Right? It's just kind
of a quick spot check. there's a there's
a more precise and annoying engineering
way to test that your software works,
but uh that's not what we're that's not
what I'm focusing on right now. Um same
code will work fine for analyzing the
real sample. That's the goal that you
design your your estimator code on
synthetic data. You're confident it
works and then when you put the real
data in is magical moment, right? You
feel this like ha, right? the heavens
sing and you get estimates and you trust
them much more instead of wondering if
you've re mis miskeyed something. Um or
rather if the estimates are nonsense,
you know it's not your model code, it's
the data, right? Um that's a really nice
thing to to know. This code is uh just
notice that it's a bracket s and the a
bracket s appears in the prior two. This
is just how my package lets you notate
that um this uh the quap function will
just look at the number of unique values
in the variable s and construct a vector
of that length. So you don't have to
explicitly say there are two and this is
a nice luxury because then this code
works if you want to add more categories
later right you don't have to change the
model code and right now maybe you're
thinking like yeah whatever uh but when
you start doing hierarchical models
there can be hundreds of categories
because the categories are things like
town
right and uh different data sets will
have different numbers of categories and
but they could be in the hundreds or
thousands um and so it's nice to have
code that that adapts uh to the sample
like that. Is this okay? Yeah. I'm I'm
looking for some visual feedback. Derek
that was with me. And there's a variety
of interesting facial expressions. Some
of you are very pleased with this. And
some of you have a concentration face
that also looks angry. And that's okay.
It's not a criticism. I'm just trying to
get used to you as an instructor. But I
am tuned into you uh at those of you
here in the room. Uh and you set the
pace. Okay. So, if you if you have
questions, please raise your hand. There
are no bad questions. Um, often if if
I've done this right, you're asking
questions in your head and you will
interrupt me to ask them and then I have
a slide coming up that will answer it.
That has been my goal in this when as I
make my uh present presentations is to
think about, oh, at this point they're
going to be asking this, so I should put
a slide in uh for it. Okay. Um, now we
have a posterior distribution. Just to
remind you, this is the pairs plot for
this model. There are three parameters
in this model. So three in uh three
dimensions in the posterior
distribution, the two alphas and sigma.
Uh we're we're doing quadratic
approximation. We're approximating uh
the the posterior distribution as a
multivariate normal. That's a great
approximation in this case. Um uh we'll
be able to prove that as we move along
in the course. That's not what I want to
focus on. It's just that what we want to
compute from this are other things,
right? like we want the differences uh
between the alphas is where we're going
to go next. We also might want posterior
distributions. That is if we were going
to make predictions about average
weights from this posterior
distribution, what would that look like?
So in the workflow, we're now over on
the right, we've got these two tasks to
do. We want posterior predictions and
causal effects, which are really closely
related, but they're not the same thing,
right? So a posterior prediction is pick
a category. What does the model think it
looks like? Yeah, causal effect is a
hypothetical intervention. If we could
intervene on burst X, target an embryo,
and do genetic engineering, what what
difference would that make in the
expected weight? Does that difference
make sense? Yeah. I'm going to go
painfully through the calculations and
hopefully at the end of that you'll see
the distinction. Um,
so let's do some posterior means and
predictions. This is like uh these are
direct from the parameters. In this
case, this is a simple model. So you
have parameters which are the uh
expectations for each category. That
won't always be true, but here it is. Um
so I pull out the samples. Remember
processing samples is an easy way to do
all of the uh uh integration that's
needed to to have uh uh predictions with
the correct uncertainties. And then I
just plot the marginal posterior
densities for the two categories. So
these are the alphas. So they're just
the means.
We're going to do something extra in a
moment. Use the third parameter that's
coming. But these are just the means. So
you'll see there's no overlap. The model
is very confident that the average woman
in this population. This is the Kalahari
son in the 1960s
are around 42. Um and that the average
man is a little under is little underify
confident. No overlap at all. Yeah.
Question.
>> So for the alpha
following
normal distribution
>> no these are the posterior
distributions. So these are the
uncertainties in the average and we
assumed that these were normal. Yeah.
That's the quadratic approximation
>> for the for the alpha js.
>> Yes. for the alphas. Exactly. Yes.
>> They are like alpha for females and
alpha for
>> males. That's right. Exactly. So the the
red one here is alpha sub one and the
blue one is alpha sub 2. Yeah. Uh and if
you ran this as a as a markoff chain,
which you could do just by replacing
quap with ulam, but we'll do that at the
at the end of of this course. Uh you
would still get normal distributions in
this case. But that's the way you could
test the quadratic approximation. Yeah.
Um this is not these are just means is
what the point of this slide is to
estimate to you. Uh this is not the
distribution of women and men,
right? This this is the distinction.
This is the uh average like like asking
the model to guess the averages and it's
really confident the averages are
different. But if we add the sigma in,
right? Remember the sigma is the
standard deviation around the average.
That's what we do next. Now we have
posterior distributions for weight. Now
I'm going to simulate
um a thousand women and a thousand men
from the posterior distribution. Line
one there. W1 is uh distribution of
actual predicted weights. Not average
weight but actual weights for sex one
which is women in this in this coding.
um I use the posterior distribution for
alpha sub one that is for each sample
from the posterior distribution I
simulate a woman uh and we have the
posterior distribution of sigma also in
this so for each sample from sigma we
also don't know sigma right we have a
distribution for sigma
um and so we get a bunch of weights and
then again for sex two for men and then
I plot those densities in the bottom
right and you'll see there's tons of
overlap now you're human so you know
Right? But the the top is very
misleading. And if you were in a data
context where you didn't have as clear a
set of expectations about what the
distribution should look like, you might
trick yourself. Right? You want to
remember exactly what the parameters
mean or don't mean. And here they're
just means. The distributions uh the
posterior predictions uh are in the
lower right uh the overlap. Um and I
have a a brief sermon if you'll indulge
me. Um
what we usually want in and when we do
causal inference is a contrast of some
kind to know the difference. Um and is
it is common unfortunately in lots of
fields and published papers that people
do not compute the contrast but instead
just look at the overlap of
distributions and make conclusions about
whether they're different. So looking at
the distributions
um up here of of posterior uh women and
men, that's a strange phrase. I
apologize, but that's exactly what it
is. It's the posterior distributions of
of women and men. They overlap a lot.
And again, you knew this before you we I
showed you the data, but that's the
point of familiar examples. Um but that
doesn't tell us uh what the expected
difference is between a randomly
selected woman and man.
I'll say that again. This does, this
graph does not tell us what the expected
difference in weight is between a
randomly selected woman and man. That's
a different calculation which we're
going to do, but it's different. And I I
warn you on this again because I see
lots of published papers which make this
mistake which means that the papers are
basically dead in the water as published
and uninterpretable.
Uh this overlap could mean almost any
difference in the means as well. You
have to compute the contrast
distribution. In my experience,
psychologists are really good about
knowing to do this. It's some somewhere
in baby psychology school, psychologists
are taught you must compute the
contrast. Biologists are way less good
at this. I see lots of biology journals
where this is routinely missed by
everybody, the authors, the reviewers,
the editors. Um, and then it hits the
pages and you're like, well, that was a
waste of everyone's time, right? Unless
the data are available, you don't know
if there's any result. Uh so that's why
I'm very um annoying about this
particular point because it's it's one
of my like top three errors basic
statistical processing errors that I see
in published papers. Uh a related one
being people comparing p values to
decide if categories are different.
Right? If one category is significantly
different from zero and the other isn't
that means nothing about their
difference
because you must compute the contrast um
and assess whether that is different
from zero. Does that make sense? Um
there will be more examples of this as
we go. Um to give you an intuition about
about this and and why it's not
sufficient just to look at overlap,
here's a hypothetical example to
illustrate the case. So just two
anonymous parameters from some posterior
distribution. It's very common for
parameters to be correlated in the
posterior distribution. If this were a
frequentist analysis, this could happen
too because this just means the sampling
distributions are correlated. Yeah, it's
the same idea. Well, I shouldn't say
it's the same idea. For a basian like
me, it's not the same idea, but uh in
this context for additive models, it
looks the same. Um now, when you look at
these parameters and I just ask you
what's their difference in means, it's
not so easy to get it from the figure.
Yeah, you know that they're positively
correlated. Are they the same
information? Are they different
information? It's not clear. So let me
put up uh their their independent
distributions and their contrast to give
you an idea what's going on. Um so the
graph on the right uh parameter one in
blue parameter 2 in red those are just
the marginal distributions. So the
marginal distribution parameter one is
like just thinking about projecting the
shadow of that distribution shining a
light above the graph on the left so
that it's shadow is projected on the x-
axis and that's the marginal
distribution of parameter 1. Did that
help anybody? No. No, that didn't help
anybody. It's another way be if if you
were a person in this two-dimensional
space walking around that graph on the
left and you were um uh under the x-axis
looking at that hill, all you would see
is the shape of parameter one, right?
You can't see parameter 2. Does this
help you better? And so the hill you
would see is the blue hill.
Yeah. In that location. And then if you
walked around the left and walked up, so
you were standing near the parameter 2
label on the left of this slide and
looked towards the hill, you would not
see parameter one anymore. You would
only see parameter 2. Those are the
marginal distributions. The
distributions you see when you're on the
margin on one particular margin. Does
that make sense? And then that's the red
one. And they're different. Yes, they
overlap a lot. Does that mean that they
don't differ significantly or that they
contain mostly the same information? No.
uh they're reliably different. And so
when we take the corresponding values of
parameter 1 and parameter 2 and subtract
them from one another and pile up all
those differences, we get the black
distribution.
And the the that distribution is
reliably negative.
Yeah. Piled up on minus one. Why?
Because I rigged this example to be that
way. But this happens in real analysis.
So what's the lesson here? Uh you want
me to get to the point? Um never use
overlap. you must compute the contrast.
Okay, overlap is sometimes useful. You
want to know the marginal distribution,
calculate it. But if it's a question
about the difference between two
distributions, you must compute the
contrast. Was that a hand?
>> Well, I was wondering, wouldn't I also
want to comput the difference?
>> I'm not sure what that means, but maybe.
Uh, what do you mean within?
every point in parameter,
right?
>> Yeah.
>> But what if I als
Yeah. So that's like the variance or
some other measure of spread in the
category as you're thinking about
Wouldn't that need to know that in order
to interpret the difference or is that
just
>> um not if the if if the raw difference
you don't need to know that because it's
just the difference between the
corresponding values in their
distribution but if you have some other
estim then by all means calculate it and
yeah yeah I'll accept that that's fine
yeah
>> for men and women it could be like are
many things
>> yes
>> I I asked myself that many [laughter]
are actually.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Are the groups even groups?
>> Are the groups even groups? And once you
know that they're groups, are they
different from each other?
>> That seems how much. So that's like an
analysis of variance. It sounds like
where we're going. Not to say that's
exactly what you're saying, but that
there's variance within and between and
you want to partition that in the total
sample. Yeah. So we have the variances
uh within each group already, although
we we made them constant across groups.
So this sounds like we'd want to back up
and fit a model where we subset sigma by
sex. Yeah. This sounds like and that'd
be a great idea because it varies,
right? It absolutely does. I leave that.
Maybe that's a homework problem.
>> Sorry. You can you can blame her for
this homework problem. No, it'd be an
easy homework problem. Maybe I will.
I'll give you that. Anyway, I'm going to
move on from here. I could talk about
this for another 20 minutes, though.
That's how how important this basic kind
of processing issue is. There's another
contrast we are interested in which is
the causal contrast. that is a
hypothetical intervention
uh for an individual. What difference
would that make in the expected weight?
Um so now we want the contrast between
the alphas. Uh in that's all it is in an
additive model like this. In later
models, nonlinear models, you need more
parameters to compute predictions. But
in this one, it's just as simple as the
difference between the alphas. Um this
is different than the difference between
the weight distributions, right? So this
is but this is the est this is the
estimate
of the estimal
effect. So we just compute the contrast
as the difference between the
corresponding samples for alpha alpha 2
and alpha 1 is the order I've done it
here. Um so that it's positive. If you
did it one minus two that's fine, but
then it would be negative. Yeah, it
would just be mirrored on the x- axis.
And then we plot the distribution and
then you see that it's around seven but
there's uncertainty somewhere it's
between five and nine. Yeah. Um does it
make sense how this is different than
the other things? So I' I've computed a
number of things all from the posterior
distribution and they're all answers to
different questions. And as you gain
fluency in this business, you get good
at knowing which of these you need.
Yeah.
Okay. Uh
so um yes the weight contrast is another
thing. So what's the the now we take the
full distributions not just the means
and we say uh say what the contrast what
the difference in distributions is. You
could think of this as randomly sampling
a man and a woman and what's uh the
expected difference in their weights and
that's difference than different than
the expected mean uh difference. So
again the simulation's like before but
we subtract W2 from W1 and we get the
graph in the lower right. Um 82% of the
time the randomly sampled man is heavier
and 18% of the time the randomly sampled
woman is heavier. not easy to get from
the overlap in the upper right. Yeah.
And Yeah. And there's no way to get it.
In fact, so if you're looking at it
like, "How would I ever know that?" You
can't. You must compute the contrast.
This is my sermon. What do you do? You
compute the contrast. Yeah. If your
question is about a difference, then you
compute that difference. And you think
about exactly how it's defined. Um,
okay, we're halfway through.
Uh, so we've got, um, the causal effect
of us on W. Uh, and you can think about
this, I would think about this as just
the the black curve here. That's the
expected difference that is made by
intervening on sex. Um, but you may also
be interested in that contrast
distribution of observed weights as well
because that's also kind of an
expectation of of an effective
intervention, right? On observables, you
don't observe a mean. A mean is a
prediction, but it's not observable.
Does that make sense? Yeah. There's a
question again.
>> When you say the content.
>> No, when I say compute the contrast,
you've already done the estimation. You
take the posterior distribution and you
compute the contrast.
Uh you take in this case that means one
of the alphas minus the other alpha but
in different models it'll mean different
things but the estimation happens
exactly once in basian statistics when
you compute the posterior distribution.
Everything after that involves no
further approximations or estimations.
It's computations. You apply functional
transformations to the posterior
distribution. And that's what both of
the graphs on this slide are quite
simply. And when you work through the
code on your own at home or this code's
in the book as well, you're you're just
going to take those samples from the
posterior and process them. and you
apply a transformation to each set of
associated samples and you get the
resulting distributions. And these
distributions contain all of the
uncertainty that's in the posterior
distribution. There's been no
uncertainty has been shed. Yeah. Does
that make sense?
Um next, uh we've got one more estim.
Now we want to decompose. We want the
direct causal effect of sex on weight.
Now height is going to appear.
Yeah, because we want to decompose.
There are two paths in this assumed
model by which um sex has a causal
influence on weight. One is through
height
and one is direct so to speak. And we
want to decompose these.
Does that make sense just what the
question is? Yeah. Um another way to say
this, biologically, uh my first degree
is in human biology. So, so I anchor
myself in these things in a very
physiological way. But um
the effect through height is through
difference in stature, expected stature
at adulthood. That's just restating what
height means, right? But what would a
direct path mean? That would be body
composition.
Yeah.
Does that make sense? And then what
we're going to do is decompose that to
see how much of in this population the
difference in adult weight is due to
differences in body composition.
It's not a silly question. Again, I'm a
human biologist, so I think that's a
really great question. Other people
might find it boring. Okay, back to our
workflow diagram. I've added some stuff
on the right to to tell you where we've
been. We've now we're going to do estim
two. So, we go back to the start and we
come back through. We're going to make a
new statistical model. We're going to
get a new posterior distribution. And
then we're going to compute another
cause set of causal effects and
posterior predictions. Okay, just say
where we're going to go and I think
we'll finish this today. Yeah, unless
you stop me. Um, okay. So uh to get the
direct causal effect on SNW, we need to
uh I put this in quotation marks because
it's like a promise that I'll explain
more logically in a future lecture. We
want to block the association through H.
What this means statistically is we're
going to stratify by height.
To say that in planer language, uh so
stratify statistically means you just
condition on it. uh uh or rather for
each height we look at pairs of uh we
look at pairs of men and women and we
say how different are they? Men and
women of the same height,
right? This is the goal. If you had a
really big sample, you could just do it
by tabulation, right? You have a bunch
of men and women and then you have them
line up. Everybody lines up by height
and you'll have people next to one
another and you sort them so they're
male and female pairs of the same height
as close as possible. And then you
measure their weights. You have
stratified by height, right? Because
you've you've you've numerically created
subsamples in which the individuals
don't differ by height, but they differ
by sex. And then you can measure the
direct effect of sex.
Yeah. Did that help? Yes. At the same
time, if you've done that, you could
stratify by sex and you could get the
effect of height holding sex constant,
right? You just take all the guys and
you look at their height differences.
Yeah. Uh but that that the
stratification we're interested in is
holding height constant. Um so let's try
to think about this graphically. Uh we
have that same simulation code from the
previous lecture. Sim height weight. Um
we have parameters in here which
correspond to slopes. Those are the B's.
Those are the relationships between
height and weight. and the intercepts,
the A's, the alphas, and those are the
the um uh uh they're not the average
effect, but they're they contribute to
the average difference, the height of
the lines. Um so in this simulation,
here's some simulated data that I
produced from these parameter values
here, cases where there's the same
slope. That is the B is 0.5 in both
cases, but the alphas are different. And
what this does is create two lines,
right? When we plot the points up,
they look like they're on the same line.
Yeah. But they have the same slope.
Don't you love illusions
like this? Again, it's like this is why
we don't do data analysis with our
eyeballs, right? This is why statistics
exists. I have a job. No. Um the human
visual system is a fantastic feat of
evolutionary engineering, but it is good
for some things, not others, right? Uh
uh I'm not saying the real sample is
like this. We're going to find out what
the real sample is like. Um but it's
very difficult just from a scatter plot
to tell what's going on. Um okay. So how
do we make a model then that includes
both the the uh the A's and B's, the
betas and alphas? Um there's a little
bit more engineering here. I want you to
bear with me. Uh I dislike statistics as
much as the next person. Actually, I'm a
scientist. I only do statistics because
there's no other way out but through.
Yeah. No, I mean that it's like it's
just true. There's no nothing else to do
about it. So, but let's talk about model
specifications. Uh help you understand
how they satisfy the scientific goal
here. Um we want to stratify by height.
Um uh and we're also going to stratify
by sex. I'm going to put sex in this
later when we subset by it just to keep
it simple. Um, and one of the things
that's going to make it easier to
specify priors in many of the examples
that we do is uh called centering um a
variable. And what we're going to center
here, what I've done in this slide is I
subtracted the average height from each
height. So you see that term h subi
minus h bar that the slope multiplies
that is the centered version of height.
uh what that does what that means is is
that for an average person with height h
bar that difference is zero
right and then their predicted weight is
what it's alpha
I'll say that again for a person of
average height that difference h subi
minus h bar is zero and so the beta term
goes away and has no effect on the
prediction and the only thing left in
that line is alpha so the meaning of the
intercept. When you center a regression
variable, the meaning of the intercept
is the average of the outcome.
This is nice. Why? Because it makes the
prior easier to specify. In the absence
of this, what is alpha? It's it's the
expected weight when your height is
zero,
right? Which in this case is zero,
[laughter] right? But none of these
these are adults. And so we're nowhere
near that. The intercept is way off the
graph, right? We don't have anyone near
a height of zero. If you use the full
sample, you get close,
right? But still at birth, the the
average birth weight of a human baby is
far from zero.
Yeah. If you've ever held a baby, you
know this, right? They weigh something.
Yeah. At conception, they're not even
zero, but they're close enough to it,
right? So, I have I gave you a homework
problem where this was meant meant for
you to think about this where I asked
you to model height by age. Yeah. Didn't
I do that or am I hallucinating? Yes. So
this was the case you need to think was
encourage you to think through this
problem of the meaning of the intercept.
So height is zero when uh uh when age is
zero is a weird thing to think about.
But height is not zero when age is zero.
Height is zero when age is like minus 9
months, right? Which is weird. Yeah.
There there are a lot of human societies
um uh where you're not age zero when
you're born because they go from
conception. Uh Korea is a prominent
example, right? And so there's like I
had a good Korean friend in grad school
used to talk about his Korean age and
his white age. His Korean age was one
year more. It depends about which
document he used, how old he was. It's a
very confusing system, but um they're
both correct, right? It's just
arbitrary. Okay, that was a digression.
you get them for free in this course.
Um,
so H bar is the average height. Uh, and
that difference is the so-called
centered height. Centering is nice. You
don't have to do it, but it makes the
interpretation of the priors easier and
it makes uh interpretation of the
parameters easier and it makes it easier
to specify prior. So I want to introduce
you to it here because we're going to
use it in future examples. Um, another
thing that happens when you center is
that now the regression line is going to
pass through the average of the two
variables. It has to um uh because
remember uh alpha is going to be the
average weight at the average height. So
I've drawn these vertical dash lines at
the the the I mean the vertical one is
average height and the horizontal dash
line is average weight and where they
meet in the center the regression line
must go through by the definition of the
regression line. Yeah. Uh so it's pivots
around this point and this makes it
easier to think about what the
regression is doing. uh when alpha means
uh uh the value of the y variable when
the x variable is zero, it may not even
be on the graph, right? And then your
line is just pivoting around some point
that's off the graph and it's easy it's
harder to think about uh how it behaves
and how the uncertainties work. Again,
this is all optional, but I really
recommend it as standard practice. It's
it's a very nice thing to do. Um just
part of the engineering of the business.
Uh now we're going to um we're going to
uh we're going to stratify by sex
because that's the the est demand. Um
we've already stratified by height. So
now when we simultaneously stratify by
sex, we'll be able to look at the
difference
um uh in weight with uh bisex within the
same height.
Yeah. Um, and this uh just to show you
again how this works to remind you it's
only the second time. Now we have two
vectors because I've I'm stratifying
both alpha and beta by sex. I think
psychologists would call this an
interaction.
I just call it stratify. [snorts] But
the difference I think in psychology,
and this is not a criticism, I want to
be clear. In psychology, interactions
are special things that you do when you
feel special and sparkly. Uh, and in
biology they're things you do all the
time.
That's the way I was taught. I I have a
very traditional biostats education and
you just interact everything all the
time. Uh just by default and if you
don't want to interact stuff, you need
to really say why. Um yeah, and I think
that just the convention is different in
psychology has been my experience. Yeah.
People come to me and ask when do I do
an interaction? And I'm like always like
not to say that that's necessarily a
great curistic but it's where I start
and then I model expand down but um if
you want to model expand up that works
fine too. But I just want to point out
that I've stratified both alpha and beta
by sex. So now we have two vectors.
Alpha of link 2 and beta of link 2.
Alpha sub one is the intercept for sex
category 1. Um beta sub one is the slope
for sex category 1. Is this okay?
Uh your computer is perfectly happy with
this. Right? So again it on the first
row s has value two. So it pulls out
alpha 2 and beta 2 um and gives you a
line for those corresponding intercepts
and slopes. And on row two s has value
one. So it pulls out alpha 1 and beta 1.
So it's like there's different lines for
each the lines can vary in every way for
the different categories.
Good. Um here's the model code. Again
you just put bracket s on stuff. It's
that easy. uh both in the in the linear
model and in the prior. Yeah. And um and
then I pushed out the posterior
predictions here. I'm not showing you
the code to push these out, but uh uh
you've had code before that would do
this. We're just plotting the line. This
is the posterior mean line for each sex.
Uh females in red, um males in blue. And
you'll see they're very similar. Yeah,
these are the posterior means. So don't
get too excited about their slight
different in slope difference in slope.
Um if you put the uh uncertainty
intervals around those you'll see
they're extremely similar.
Um
what we want though this is not these
are posterior predictions but we want
the contrast at each height. Remember
the goal is to say for each height
imagine manipulating sex holding height
constant. What's the expected change in
body weight? That's the est demand.
Yeah, remember? Um, so we're going to do
that. How do we do that? We compute the
posterior predictive distribution for
women. We compute the posterior predict
distribution for men. And we subtract
them from one another. And then we plot
the distribution at each height. Uh, and
that gives us the estim right? How would
you figure this out? Uh, that's the
structure of your estimate, right? Just
think about the structure of your
question. You're imagining an
intervention where the difference is
you're looking at individuals who are
the same in all ways except for we've
changed sex and then all the downstream
effects of just that holding the other
variables constant uh uh uh are the
same. And so we can do that. Here's the
code to do it. Um I'm using for
shorthand here this link function that's
part of my package. But in the book uh
there's a box where I tell you how link
works. And I I really recommend you take
a look at it at some point. Um because
all it's doing is like in the previous
examples, you're just simulating with a
function like Rorm observations.
Yeah,
it's just convenient. You can give it
the model and link reads the model code,
the linear model from the model you fit
uh that you computed the posterior from
and it saves you time. But it's nice to
understand at least the first few times
you do this uh what it's actually doing.
um and in this case and then I can I
subtract them from one another and we
get the contrast and so plotting height
of individuals across the horizontal in
the graph here. The vertical is the
contrast
and there's a horizontal line at zero.
So this is the I know this looks weird.
It's some bizarre bow tie. This is the
posterior distribution of differences in
women and men at different heights.
I'll say that again. It's the posterior
distribution of the weight differences
from women and men at different heights.
Yeah. Um so uh you'll see that there are
a bunch of cases where women are
heavier. That's above the horizontal
dash line at zero. And there a bunch of
cases where the men are heavier. And
there's a very slight tilt to this
thing. What's the conclusion? Nearly all
of the causal influence of sex in this
sample is through height. Right? Because
across height as you move across the
horizontal axis, not much changes.
Yeah, you get more uncertainty. That's
there's more variation at the extremes.
But of course, there's fewer individuals
at the extremes
which is contributing to that. But
there's a very slight tilt which
suggests there are body composition
differences as people get taller.
Yeah, does this make sense? But there's
not much of an effect. The vast majority
of the difference in uh uh weight
distributions in this sample are due to
height that sexes effect on stature.
Does that make sense? This may not be
true in other populations, nor may it be
true in this population at a different
point in time, but in the 1960s in the
Kalahari, this is true. These are slim
people, right? That's part of what's
going on here.
This make this good. There there are a
bunch of pregnant expressions. I'm not
sure if that's understanding or
questioning. Elation
joy. Um okay, you could visualize this
different ways, but uh this is the way I
ended up doing it after trying a few.
Let me let me put this back in the
workflow. Um and try to wrap this up.
And uh so we've had our two estims. One
is the total causal effect of sex on
weight where we did not use the height
variable because if we had I hope you
appreciate now we would we would not
have been able to read alpha as the
difference between men and women
right because we would have conditioned
on height.
Yeah, it has a different meaning when
you put more variables into it. when we
condition on height in the second model
then to compute uh alpha didn't isn't
even what we wanted anymore the to get
the causal effect we wanted we had to
use the alphas and betas together right
we had to simulate a bunch of women we
had to simulate a bunch of men and then
within the one simulated ones of the
same height we take uh then we we do
subtractions and we plot across heights
yeah that is we've intervened on sex
right leaving the height distribution
distions the same as what we did in to
simulate the effect but we used both
variables. You could look at this the
second model the other way and be
interested in the height path, right?
Because we've just decomposed them. In
other uh data sets, you would have more
than two paths by which a variable
affects the outcome, right? There's lots
of complex mechanisms. It depends upon
what you're modeling. Uh and next
lecture I'll give you a more uh well a
full framework for dealing with that
complexity. And as as I will show you
the good news is it's very simple.
There's a simple set of rules, basically
three, by which no matter how complex
the structural causal diagram, you can
figure out which things you need to
condition on to get a specific estimate.
And I'll teach that to you next time.
Okay, it's a promise. Yes. Um, I want to
wrap up here. I think it's very
important to know where where we've
been. Uh, so here's the full workflow
again.
I hope you like these workflow diagrams.
I like them a lot. Yeah, they're nice
things. Draw them for yourself. when you
do an analysis, there's there's nothing
wrong with that. It's absolutely a great
thing to do to do. I think it's
unfortunate. There's very little
software support for workflow right now.
I don't think there's any tool that I
know of that makes it easy to build an
analysis like this and then attach the
specific code of each step to the to
this workflow diagram. That would be a
wonderful thing if anybody wants to
write that. Uh it would be a great thing
to have. There is pipeline software, but
that's different.
Right? A pipeline is just an algorithm.
[snorts]
Uh this is different because this has a
bunch of justifications and
transformations in it. It's it's a
different thing. But it it's I bet you
could just build on top of pipeline
software. I'm putting this in this talk
because maybe there is someone at home
who will listen to this and think,
"Yeah, that's a great project for me."
And we'll write this. I think it's a
wonderful open area of scientific
support is to go beyond pipelines to
scientific workflows. Um lots of
innovation uh is possible there. Um so
in this case we have our generative
model just one in this case but you
could have more right in which case you
would have even more estimates I mean
even more estimators because for each
estim combined with each generative
model you get a different statistical
model and then you'd have more estimates
and more causal effects and you'd want
to compare them at the end. That's a
realistic scientific project. And I
apologize that this is simplified, but
at the same time, I don't apologize it's
simplified because it's this I'm trying
to teach it to you in steps. But but I I
say this when you do your own projects,
don't feel like you've done something
wrong because you're not sure which
generative model to use. I'm not trying
to imply you need only one. It's it's
totally normal and healthy to have
uncertainty about the causal structure
of the system you're studying, in which
case you can vary the causal model and
see what it changes in your estimates.
If it doesn't change the conclusions at
all, uh then you can say your
conclusions are robust to reasonable
scientific variations in the causal
model. If it does change your
conclusions, then you want to say so.
Yeah. Um it's your conclusions are
definitely sensitive to changes in the
causal model. Uh but but we don't care
about dumb changes to the causal model,
right? Ones that violate your background
scientific knowledge. So it's not a
problem that uh say reversing some of
those arrows would change your results,
right? Because you can justify the
directions of those arrows. Does that
help? Does that make sense? Uh the same
goes for um decisions you need to make
in building the estimators. We made
everything linear here. It doesn't have
to be. Yeah, I made the sigas uh
constant across the categories, not only
across sexes, but across height. uh that
is not true empirically. Um if you're
worried that that creates some kind of
bias in your inferences, you can back up
to the to the middle of this diagram and
make another a subset of cyclical models
where you subset the sigma by sex or you
model sigma as a linear model of height.
There's absolutely nothing wrong with
that.
Yeah.
Um does this make sense? Does this
terrify you? Yeah. Yes. No. Um, in this
case, it won't make a difference. Uh,
but I encourage you to to try that for
yourself. Uh, and this brings me to the
last thing. Sorry if I'm a bit
longwinded here, is that statistical
models uh uh don't have assumptions.
People have assumptions. Right? So,
linear regression has no assumptions at
all because it has no brain, right? It's
just a little machine. It just does
stuff and it it produces things. uh your
interpretations of its output do depend
upon assumptions but the algorithm
itself doesn't and that means that for
some purposes the the usual lists of
things that are called the assumptions
of linear regression are irrelevant. Uh
so for example you may have been taught
in a previous course if you've taken
statistics before that linear regression
assumes normality
uh you may have been taught completely
wrong things that it assumes normality
of the variables. That's always wrong.
But you may have been taught that it
assumes normality of the residuals
which is also wrong [snorts]
but not as wrong.
There are calculations you can make from
the output of a linear regression which
do depend upon the residuals being
normal like p values. Uh but the
validity of the estimate of the mean
does not. Right? I know this is subtle.
It may be weird and bewildering, but I
think it's an important point to make is
that the assumptions are yours and they
and they license assumptions license
calculations.
Uh, but not all calculations require the
same assumptions. But the the algorithm
itself is making no assumptions at all.
It's just a dumb computer, right? The
assumptions are yours. Maybe this is a
weird just me um being grumpy about
language, but you've heard the phrase
before that linear regression assumes,
right? right? As if it were an active
agent. No, it doesn't. It assumes
nothing. Now, as a basian, we're
especially prickly about this um because
we make weaker assumptions about about
statistical models like about the shape
of the residuals. For us, using a normal
distribution in a linear regression
implies no assumption at all about the
distribution of the residuals. Why?
Because it's a prior. It's a prior for
the residuals. The residuals are free to
take any distribution they want. But we
are imposing a prior that is normal and
that does affect the estimates. Uh but
it it is not a claim that the residuals
must be normally distributed for the
estimates to be valid. Remember a normal
distribution is a machine that estimates
a mean and a variance. If you want to do
other things with it, then yeah, you're
going to have to make stronger
assumptions. And that's okay. Uh in
fact, it's better than okay. It's good
to make strong assumptions. Uh because
this is me sermonizing. I I apologize
but um
a strong inference requires strong
assumptions. Yeah. So inference without
assumptions I said this in the other
section last week, didn't I? Uh an
inference without assumptions is like an
opinion without reasons, right? The only
thing it can be is either incredibly
obvious and boring or implausible and
ignorable. Right?
uh so someone makes a very strong
opinionated claim but won't give any
reasons for it you will ignore them
right or that the opinion will be so
vapid and obvious that it's ignorable as
well and I think scientific inference is
like that if it's always the strength of
the assumptions that makes the
inferences strong and when you return
next time I will uh try to demonstrate
that to you by building up this uh
presenting to you this formal framework
for causal inference um that will give
you a way to go from arbitrary
generative models and estims to
designing statistical estimators. And
the good news is it's simple, right?
It's not simple to derive, but other
people did the work for us and now I
just have to teach it to you. Okay, that
is my promise to you. Um, let me leave
you with just this slide as the end. We
will the idea being we will complicate
the causal graphs. Maybe uh imagine
there were a variable that influenced
height and weight. What would this do to
the workflow in this presentation? Would
it invalidate it? We will find out next
time. It's not just that we will find
out is I will teach you a way to figure
it out for yourself so that you do not
need me anymore. That's really my goal.
Okay. Thank you for your attention. I
apologize for being uh for sermonizing a
bit and I'll see you next time.